# Solving porblems, or the art of debbuging

You will inevitably bump into bugs in your code (eg: random segmentation faults).
It is thus helpful to know what tools exist that can help you in debugging your programs.

This document is by no means a thorough guideline, but rather, a introductory document to the arsenal of tools available to you.
This document therefore does not expect for you to fully understand the intricacies of using these tools, but rather aims to help you develop a better understanding of what is available and provide a preview of some of the simpler things that can be done to help debug your code.
As with learning any programming skills, there are many resources online to help you on the way so long as you know what you're searching for.

Notes:
* You will likely spend at least an hour or two to go through this entire document, but doing so will likely save you many more hours down the line.
* For simplicity, I will be assuming that you are in a [Unix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix)-based environment; you are when you use the vscode terminal in docker.

The procedure for solving your bugs will likely be something akin to going down the sections of this document using all the techniques one after the other, and sometimes going back up, helped by what you learned about the bug from using the previous technique.
In each section you will have to pose hypotheses about the bug, test them, and adjust, refine or change hypothesis until you know how to fix the bug, or don't progress anymore in your search.

If at any point you think you are lost, or are wasting too much time on a bug, or if the tools here do not fit your problems / needs, simply searching "How to fix XXXX" (or just the error message you initially got) in a search engine will likely get you to a solution or at least bring you a better understanding of the problem.
You might be surprised by the results (This is how I found out about valgrind, one of the tools presented below).
And if that still isn't doing it, remember that TAs are here to help you; they may not solve the issue immediately, and once they know what the issue is, they may explain it to you instead of solving it for you.
But even then they want you to succeed; sometimes coming up with your own solution that you understand and can explain in the written report is what the TA thinks is best for you.

## Error messages

You should always start by reading error messages and try to understand them.
Not only will it help you locate where the bug may be, it can also help you diagnose the cause of the bug, if not straight up tell you how to fix it.

One of the first question to ask yourself with the error message is what step of `test.py` failed.
There are several steps usually well described in the log and error messages, each one pointing to a specific class of error:
* cleaning the project (optional, shouldn't fail);
* producing object files from your compiler source files, a failure here means you wrote invalid code;
* linking together all the object files to produce your compiler executable, a failure here means there is a mismatch between what some source file expect and some source file and libraries provide;
* initialising coverage data (optional, shouldn't fail);
* running tests one after the other, refer to the paragraph below for details; and
* processing coverage data (optional, shouldn't fail).

Running tests is itself composed of several steps per test:
* generating reference assembly using gcc for riscv, a failure here means you modified a test or added invalid tests;
* generating assembly using your compiler, a failure here means your compiler is crashing or stuck in a loop;
* assembling the assembly generated by your compiler into an object file, a failure here means the assembly you generated is wrong or incomplete;
* producing the executable from the object file and the driver, a failure here means there is a mismatch between what the driver expects and what the assembly you generated provides (or the test is not valid, see first bullet);
* simulating the executable, a failure here means the driver is invalid, or the assembly produced by your compiler is not behaving correctly/as you expected (or the test is invalid).

## Code coverage

This applies only to the code of your compiler because there are no simple ways of generating coverage data on the assembly generated by your compiler.
So if the bug you are looking for is in the produces assembly, go back to this section if you don't know and want help finding where in your compiler can the wrong assembly have been generated.

You can quickly pinpoint where your compiler crashes, or if your program executes as you expect, by using code coverage data when compiling a single test file.
[We provide all you need to simply produce coverage data.](./coverage.md)

Chose a single test file to generate coverage information as explained in `coverage.md`.
You can start by looking at the last line executed in [`compiler.cpp`](../src/compiler.cpp) and dive into the last executed function until wither the last executed statement is not a function (you found the crash point) or you lose track because of inheritance, loops, or recursion.
If you find a section of code which is fully covered when it shouldn't, use number of times the line has been covered as a hint.

This should at least give you a better idea of where the crash is and isn't, and do so faster than inserting termnial outputs and recompiling.
It also avoids questioning your sanity because terminal output is buffered: what you print is not always displayed immediately -or at all if the program crashes at the wrong point.

## Proof-reding code

This applies to small programs, small portions of code you or your collaborators just added, and small portions of code you identified as being the source of the problem.

Writing nonsensical code, code relying on wrong assumptions, syntactically invalid code, and code riddled with typos are common sources of errors.
It happens to everyone, especially when focused on solving a problem, so you shouldn't judge harshly yourself or your colleages about it.
But it fortunately means that most of the time bugs can be spotted (and sometimes solved) by reading the code carefully while attempting to simulate what it does at a high level.

Your first reading pass should be focused on spotting syntax errors and dodgy code.
The second reading pass should attempt to make sense of the intent of the code at a high level, what non-trivial assumptions are made, and why it is doing what it does the way it does.
If not already done, any non-trivial assumption should be transformed into an assert statement, what the code is doing should be transformed into better names and formatting (identations, line breaks, etc.), and reasons behind the way the code is doing what it is doing should be transformed into comments.
Finally the last read should be focused on simulating carefully the code step by step with the values you would have expected at the moment the bug occured.
Not down these values because if you didn't find the bug yet, they will help you for the next step.

## Debuggers

TODO HERE
